Section 1 –  
Bisley General Info 
Bisley General Information 
The Probationary Course is designed so that your tuition is constantly assessed and evaluated by the Instructor Team. 
They are there to help you through the course and always remember, there are NO SILLY QUESTIONS so please do not 
be reticent about asking. If you’re thinking it, there’s bound to be another student on the course who is thinking the 
same thing. 
 
The National Rifle Association 
The National Rifle Association (NRA) is the National Governing Body (NGB) for full bore rifle and pistol shooting sports 
in the UK and is in fact also the largest Home Office Approved Club in the UK with numbers in excess of 10,000. 
Registered as a United Kingdom charity, its objectives are to "promote and encourage marksmanship throughout the 
King’s dominions in the interest of defence and the permanence of the volunteer and auxiliary forces, naval, military 
and air." 
The formal purposes of the charity are to promote the efficiency of the armed forces of the Crown, or the police, fire 
and rescue or ambulance services. 
The National Shooting Centre at Bisley is a wholly-owned subsidiary of the association. 
The NRA was founded in 1859, 12 years BEFORE its American namesake and was originally located on Wimbledon 
Common, running along Parkside. 
In 1890, the NRA re-located to the current venue at Bisley and this is when Queen Victoria granted the NRA a royal 
charter of incorporation. 
There are also a large number of affiliated clubs who also use the ranges at Bisley on a regular basis, and although they 
may not have been through the same Probationary Course as you are doing, the standards of training are just as high. 
The NRA boasts a very well stocked Armoury so once you have completed your training with us and have been issued 
your Full Membership and Shooter Certification Card (SCC), you will be able to rent firearms and purchase ammunition 
for use on the ranges. 
There are a large number of ranges located at Bisley, ranging from 25 to 1200 yards and you will be allowed 
unaccompanied, unsupervised use of them all. 
 
 
About the Course 
The NRA Probationary Course was originally developed from a UK Police Firearms Course which used the FBI Training 
Course structure as its source. It is a tried and tested format using rapid progression in firearms usage that makes the 
Probationary Course a very successful one. 
The course structure spans 6 days of training both in the classroom and on the ranges with regular passive 
assessments carried out on your growing knowledge to reinforce any shortfalls you may encounter. 
The afternoon of the fourth day is an assessment day and the Instructors will be testing you on various handling, range 
protocols and safety factors. This is to ensure that when you first arrive as a shooter on a range, your fellow shooters 
feel assured that you are in all respects a competent and safe person with firearms. 
Your Instructors will verbally test you at the end of each day to ensure the information taught so far has been absorbed 
and if necessary, will assist you to ensure you are ready to progress. 
 
 
3
 
 
 
Module 1 