Section 2 –  
Scope sights– Parts 
Understanding the Scopes Control Surface 
– Naming the parts (continued) 
Saddle: This part of the scope is almost always set in the middle of the barrel of the scope and houses all the 
mechanisms that make the scope work 
Objective Lens: This lens at the far end of the scope gathers the available light and transmits it down the scope where 
it eventually gets to your eye as an image. The objective is always displayed as part of the scope description along with 
the magnification 
And lastly… 
Parallax and focus turret: Let’s cover the focus part first, this turret is usually either located to the left side of the 
saddle or in the case of an “AO” scope, at the end of the scope next to the objective lens and stands for Adjustable 
Objective. Use this turret to focus onto the target. 
 
Which brings us to… 
Parallax: The technical description is the apparent movement of the reticle, relative to the target caused by the 
inconsistent positioning of the eye. 
 
Eh? 
Or when the target and reticle are on different planes within the scope, resulting in the reticle wandering around the 
target depending on the position of the eye in relation to the centre line of the scope. 
 
Nope, still don’t get it… 
Put another way, if you look through a scope at a target and move your head slightly from side to side, two things will 
happen if parallax is not set. A shadow will encroach from one or other side and the reticle will appear to move in the 
direction you moved your head. 
Incorrect parallax accounts for a great deal of misconstrued bad shooting. You could be doing everything right but if the 
parallax isn’t set correctly, your groups will wander and increase in size. 
 
How do I sort it? 
By adjusting the focus turret to ensure that the sight picture is as clear and in focus as you can make it. 
An old trick is to dial up the magnification on a target to high mag. If the target starts to go out of focus, adjust the 
focus ring accordingly until the target snaps back into focus. Then dial back the magnification to where you want to be 
or are comfortable with, repeat the head wiggle test and you will find the movement of the reticle has gone. 
Congratulations, you’ve just adjusted out parallax. Now there’s no excuse for missing! 
You now have a basic understanding of what the various controls do, let’s look at how you use them. 
 
 
 
71
 
 
 
 
Module 2 