Section 1 –  
Sight Systems - Boresighting 
OK, how do I Boresight? 
Before starting a boresighting exercise, there are two points you need to answer “yes” to: 
1. Can you EASILY remove the bolt to see down the bore? 
2. If not (like a Ruger 10/22), follow “I can’t see down the barrel” detailed next. 
3. Can you locate somewhere with enough distance to make the exercise effective? Any distance greater 
than 50 yards but less than 120 yards is ideal. 
Let’s boil down boresighting into the necessary steps: 
1. Find a unique reference point to boresight onto. This is going to be a target if you are on a range, or some 
easily identifiable thing. For this example, we are going to refer the reference point as a target 
2. Now remove the bolt from the firearm so you have a clear view down the bore from back to front 
3. You now need to securely anchor the firearm so it is as stable as possible and doesn’t move around. Use 
sandbags, coats, pillows or anything that effectively locates and stops the firearm from wiggling about 
4. It’s a good idea to wind down the magnification a certain amount because it will help with your matching 
the chosen target through the bore with the image you’ll see in the scope. There is nothing worse than 
picking a target amongst a bunch of other targets to boresight on, then pick the wrong one through the 
scope. You will be shooting somebody else’s target, thinking it’s your own. 
5. You’ve now got the firearm ready to actually boresight. To do this, look through the bore at your chosen 
target 
6. and move the firearm about until the target is located centrally in the bore 
7. Do not touch the firearm at this point and raise your eye up to the scope to see where it’s pointing in relation 
to the bore. 
8. As carefully as possible, adjust the elevation and windage turrets so the crosshairs are also pointing at your 
chosen target. 
9. Now it’s time to check the bore again as there is a high chance the firearm may have moved. If it has, re-
centre the target in the bore. 
10. Repeat steps 7 & 8 until both the crosshair of the scope and the centre line of the bore are pointing at the 
same thing. 
Once complete, your firearm will be effectively rough zeroed for approximately 100 yards. 
So what are the benefits of boresighting? 
Cost: 7.62/308 ammo is expensive. If it takes you 15 rounds to zero your rifle, that’s a lot of money. By using your Mk1 
eyeball instead, you’ve saved yourself a goodly amount. 
Satisfaction: It’s another core skill that will give you more range time. 
 
 
Congratulations, you’ve successfully boresighted your firearm. 
 
 
 
 
So, that’s all well and good for a firearm that is easy to boresight. What happens when there is no way you can look 
down the barrel without effectively taking your firearm to small bits. 
 
 
 
51
 
 
 
Module 2 