Section 2 –  
Scope sights– Parts 
Elevation & Windage Adjustment 
To adjust a scope for elevation & windage, you first have to identify the correct controls. Your scope might be slightly 
different to the scope referenced earlier so to do this effectively, always consult the owner’s manual as not all 
manufacturers adhere to the same naming conventions or positions of the control surfaces on their products. 
Generally speaking though, elevation is dialled in by turning a turret usually located on the top of the scope and 
windage is usually off the right side. 
Because the adjustment is all internal, you will not see any discernible shift in the crosshairs but you will note the 
turret can move up/down or left/right but again, this all depends on the manufacturer. 
Let’s look at Elevation first 
Elevation Turret 
 
 
 
 
As you can see, there are a number of different bits of information presented to you here, let’s break them down. 
1 
– Info: Usually, the manufacturer will stamp on the cap the relevant info about the elevation & windage. This 
will usually look like: “1 click= ¼ “ @ 100y” or “1 click = 1cm @ 100m”. 
This means that one audible “click” from the turret will move the reticle ¼“ (MoA) or 1 cm (Mil) up or down at 100 
yards/metres distance. 
In this instance, the manufacturer has included a quick reference line to indicate the Zero mark 
2 
– Direction of travel: It’s exactly what you probably thought. An arrow with a “U” in the middle pointing in the 
UP direction means…. UP. So if you fire a shot and your bullet strikes low, you need to go UP. Pretty simple?! The trick 
is to ALWAYS check this information when getting behind a scope rifle because it always catches out the unwary. 
3 
– Units & subtensions: The scope pictured is measured in ¼’s per unit so each click would represent in this 
case, ¼ “ per click as it’s an MoA scope. 
 
 
2 - Direction of travel 
3 - Units & subtensions 
4 - Reference line 
1 - Unique scope 
information, printed on 
the top of the turret 
73
 
 
 
 
Module 2 