Section 3 – Firearms: 
Introduction to firearms terminology 
As you progress through each Module, you will be introduced to a list of shooting related terms. Some you may well 
have heard of before but some will be new to you. If during the course an Instructor uses a term you are not familiar 
with, ask for an explanation. There’s nothing worse than nodding your head sagely when you have no comprehension 
of what’s been talked about! Let’s introduce a few firearms related terms for you that will come up during the first 
day: 
22 LR, .357 
Mag, .38 Spl 
These are all the names of calibres of ammunition. Generally speaking, the number usually relates to 
the diameter of the bullet in either imperial or metric form. 
Semi-Auto 
Or semi-automatic is the description of how the action of the firearm operates. Semi-auto means that 
the firearm will fire every time you pull the trigger. The firearm will then eject the fired case, strip a 
fresh cartridge from the magazine and chamber it while re-cocking the hammer. 
Lever Action Unlike semi-auto, a lever action is entirely manual. To reload the firearm, you have to operate the lever 
all the way down to first eject the spent cartridge, then lift it back into position to chamber a fresh 
cartridge and re-cock the hammer. Once complete, you may fire again then repeat the process. 
Bolt Action 
The bolt has a handle and you lift the handle, draw the bolt to the rear. The spent cartridge is ejected. 
Push the bolt forward and it will strip a fresh cartridge from the magazine (if fitted) and chamber it. 
Lastly, you close the bolt by rotating the handle back to its closed position which locks the action, 
making the firearm ready to fire again. 
Straight Pull Similar to a bolt action firearm but instead, the bolt is assisted by a spring – usually housed within 
the receiver and/or butt stock. Pull the bolt to the rear as normal but instead of pushing it forward, 
let the spring complete the load sequence. Basically, pull the bolt back, the spent case will eject, then 
let it go. It will strip a fresh round from the magazine, chamber it and cock its mechanism, ready for 
you to fire again. If you ride the bolt forward, it will not fire. 
Action or 
Receiver 
Simply put, the Action is the firing assembly and usually contains the bolt, firing pin, hammer and 
trigger assembly. It is also referred to as the Receiver. 
Barrel 
The barrel stabilises the bullet and imparts a spin on the bullet to make it gyroscopically stable. 
Muzzle 
The end of the barrel that the bullet comes out of. 
Chamber 
This is located at the rear of the barrel and is where the cartridge is held in place 
Butt or Butt 
stock 
This is the part of the stock that locates in your shoulder. Make sure it is firmly in place but not overly 
hard. Your Instructor will tell you how & where it should be placed. 
Forend 
This is the front part of the firearm under the barrel and is where your other hand goes to support the 
firearm. 
Trigger 
Guard 
This is the protective loop around the trigger that prevents inadvertent touching of the trigger by 
clothing etc. 
Trigger 
This is the bit you pull in order to fire the rifle. 
Bolt 
The bolt usually contains the firing pin, extractor and ejector in some cases. Your Instructor will detail 
these items. 
Bolt handle 
On a bolt action rifle, the bolt handle is the curved piece of metal attached to the back of the bolt and is 
used to open (unlock) and close (lock) the action. 
Guide rod 
Similar to a bolt handle, the guide rod assembly is part of a semi auto system and unlike the bolt & 
handle on a bolt action rifle, it moves back and forward every time the firearm is discharged. 
Magazine 
A receptacle that contains a certain amount of ammunition. 
Magazine 
release 
This is a catch or lever that allows you to remove the magazine from the firearm 
Safety Catch Safety catches are often located close to the trigger and do exactly what you’d expect. Block the trigger 
from being pulled or get in the way of the hammer falling 
Front & Rear 
Sight 
Exactly as you’d imagine, open sights usually come in pairs. You align the rear sight with the front sight 
at the target. 
Scope 
A glass based optical system, usually with magnification 
Reticle 
The crosshairs inside the scope that you place on the target 
 
 
17
 
 
 
Module 1 