Section 3 – Ammunition (continued) 
The .22 LR Rimfire (RF) is undoubtedly the most common calibre in the UK as it is relatively cheap to shoot as opposed 
to Centrefire (CF). It is also an extremely accurate calibre and more than capable of being fired at distances up to 100 
yards. In fact, there are 22 competitions that shoot to 200 and 300 yards. 
The .22 LR is also probably the most versatile calibre in terms of velocity spread and designed use with velocities 
ranging from 710 fps right up to 1800 fps depending on the manufacturer. 
Lastly, the .22 LR has minimal recoil and the report is comfortable when using proper hearing protection. Don’t be 
lulled though and be tempted to remove your hearing protection while others are shooting 22’s because it WILL 
ultimately damage your hearing. 
Centrefire – Pistol Ammunition - .38 Special and .357 Magnum 
These calibres will also be introduced to you as part of Day 1 training and the choice of which calibre will be dictated 
by current NRA Armoury supply. As you recall, centrefire ammunition is initiated by striking the primer in the centre of 
the base of the case. 
You are probably wondering why two calibres are listed here. Basically, the bullet diameter is the same and both 
calibres will happily fit in the same gun as long as it is chambered in the longer round: 
 
This is the .38 Special (Spl) round with a case length of 1.155”. Originally 
designed by Smith & Wesson in 1898 and one of the most popular pistol 
rounds in history. Less powerful than the .357 Mag 
This is the .357 Magnum (Mag) round with a case length of 1.29”. It was 
ultimately designed by a number of different people in the 1930’s to 
compensate for the lack of “knock down” power of the police issue .38 Spl. 
More powerful than the .38 Spl 
 
Both calibres use the same diameter (.357”) bullet and are straight walled. As long as the chamber of the rifle is 
designated as “.357 Mag”, you can fire both calibres. The .38 Spl name is based on the approximate diameter of the 
brass case as opposed to the bullet. 
This commonality exists with a number of other calibres, for instance .44 Special and .44 Magnum where the only 
difference is the case length and as long as the firearm is chambered in the longer calibre, both will fit. 
During the course, you will be exposed to a couple of other calibres with these similarities and your Instructor will 
explain them in due course. 
Centrefire – Rifle Ammunition 
Full bore rifle ammunition 
design is basically much the 
same format as rimfire 
ammunition in that it consists of 
4 component parts. 
 
Primer 
Powder 
Case 
Bullet 
 
Pistol ammunition is constructed the same way as rifle ammunition. 
 
 
32
 
 
 
Module 1 