Section 4 – The Principles of Marksmanship 
Shot release & follow through 
Remember: “The shot must be released and followed through without undue disturbance to the position” 
Shot release: A good, controlled trigger pull is absolutely essential to accurate shooting. Yanking away or flicking it will 
only ensure your grouping suffers. 
The trigger pull should be a slow but measured increase in pressure directly backwards, not angled across the firearm. 
The contact patch of your finger should be the soft part of the tip of your finger on the trigger, just forward of the last 
joint. 
 
 
 
When the firearm discharges, it should be a surprise. 
One aspect of shooting that affects absolutely EVERYONE is flinch. 
We all have a tiny, primeval voice in the back of our heads that is screaming “I 
don’t like this, it’ll hurt!” and the result is flinching. Flinching is when you react 
to an external stimulus and make a quick, nervous movement that is completely 
instinctive. By applying slow but steady trigger pressure, you can ultimately 
cheat flinch but you have to concentrate on that application of pressure or the 
flinch will return. Your Instructor will help you through Day 1. 
 
All firearms develop recoil. Larger calibres substantially more than say the .22 LR but they all have an effect on the 
end position of the firearm in relation to the target. 
Follow these simple steps, 
 
1. Once the shot is fired, you must not shift your position, move your head, or allow the muzzle to drop until the 
sight picture is regained and held for a moment. 
2. Do not anticipate the shot and move before or during the time the bullet is still in the barrel. 
3. Remember what your sight picture looked like when the shot was fired. Was it good or were your sights pointed 
to one side or high or low? Remembering what your sight picture looked like when the shot was fired will tell 
you where the shot should have hit the target. It is vital to good shooting. 
 
We advise that your follow through be held for a full 2 seconds after the shot is fired. 
Those seconds also include: 
 
time required for recovery depends on the shooting position and the calibre of the firearm being used
 
good recovery is the last stage of follow-through when it comes to evaluating both a shot and a 
shooter's position
 
reflexive recovery at the end of follow-through also prepares the shooter for the next shot
 
 
 
41
 
 
 
Module 1 