Section 2 –  
Minute of Angle 
The Rail 
Let’s invent a scenario based around a shooter who wishes to shoot out at 1000 yards. 
 
Got a rifle capable of getting out there? 
 
 
Bought an expensive scope? 
 
 
Bought the correct size rings and mount to fit it? 
 
 
Checked the elevation needed to get to 1000 yards = 40 MoA 
 
 
Just checked my scope to see if I’ve actually GOT that elevation… 
Oh… 
Scopes are designed so that the elevation setting for around 100 yards is usually set in the middle of the elevation 
range. This is because scopes are round in appearance and the mid-point on the elevation scale is the widest part or 
diameter of the scope, utilising the maximum amount of windage at closer ranges. The minimum and maximum are 
never at the exact top or bottom because there would be no windage available. 
A scope with 60 MoA of elevation has effectively only got only about 30 MoA available. Our hapless shooter has 
probably invested a tidy sum in their equipment and will not get past 600-800 yards as they need 40 MoA and the 
scope will run out at 30 MoA. 
There is a solution and that is an investment in a rail with a number of MoA built in. They look like a shallow ski slope 
and will compensate for the additional elevation needed. Here’s an example of a 0 MoA rail and a 20 MoA rail.  
As you can see, there is a small taper leading from the rear to the front: 
 
A 20 MoA rail will claw back 20 MoA from the scope, meaning you have to adjust DOWN 20 MoA and reset your zero so 
if the scope purchased originally had 60 MoA of adjustment and the zero at 100 yards gobbled up 30 MoA leaving 30 to 
play with, the addition of that 20 MoA rail claws back that lost 20 MoA, leaving the shooter with 30 + 20 or 50 MoA. Just 
enough to get them out to 1000 yards with a comfort factor of + 10 MoA. 
Summary 
This section has covered the basics of the Minute of Angle. For a description of the other methods of angular 
measurement used in shooting sports – The Mil, please refer to the Reference Section at the end of this manual 
90
 
 
 
 
Module 2 