Section 2 – Safe Shooting System 
This section is all about safety. Shooting in the UK is a sport just like any other and it is meant to be fun. 
But… 
Due to the nature of the sport, we have to maintain our absolute maximum attention to safety and not let 
complacency creep in. 
At the NRA, we abide by our Safe Shooting System and our 4 Safety Rules. 
The Ministry of Defence requires all civilian organisations using military ranges to have an auditable system of training 
based on a specific risk assessment. In response, the NRA has developed a Safe Shooting System (SSS) which has been 
approved by the MoD, and was introduced in April 2008. Civilian shooters must also possess a current Shooter 
Certification Card (SCC) signed by their club chairman. 
This system was implemented by the NRA in 2008 and based on the Army Safe System of Training. It is based on 4 
elements below: 
Safe Person 
A safe person is competent in the use of firearms and ammunition and demonstrates that capability at all times. The 
NRA Shooter Certification Card system is one example of an auditable record that the responsible officer of the club, 
normally the Chairman, has satisfied himself that, at the time of certification, the shooter has the ability to use 
firearms and ammunition safely. The NRA Probationary Course provides such training. 
Safe Equipment 
The individual shooter is responsible for ensuring: 
 
that the chosen firearm is serviceable and properly maintained 
 
that the ammunition employed in combination with the firearm results in performance within muzzle 
velocity (MV) and muzzle energy (ME) restrictions for the range 
 
that the combination of firearm and ammunition is safe and suitable for the circumstances in which it is 
being used 
Safe Practice 
Range Safety Officers (RSOs) and Range Conducting Officers (RCOs) are responsible for the safe running of ranges. 
Additional qualifications are required if pistols, moving targets, target shotguns, muzzle loading firearms, 
firearm/ammunition combinations developing a ME greater than 4500 Joules or event-specific courses of fire are 
being used. The NRA Rules of Shooting contain regulations detailing the conduct of shooting for each of its disciplines. 
Safe Place 
A safe place is one in which the controls that are necessary to enable shooting to be conducted safely have been 
identified by a site specific risk assessment and implemented through Range Standing Orders (RSO). All ranges should 
have site specific Range Orders (RO) which must be complied with at all times. It is one of the responsibilities of the 
RCO/RSO to ensure compliance by shooters under his control. Ranges must be maintained regularly and subject to 
regular inspection.  
Of these 4 elements, the most important and controlling factor is the SAFE PERSON. 
The second set of safety rules are listed in the handout but we will list them again overleaf with an explanation. Your 
Instructors will also cover them in detail in the classroom. 
 
 
14
 
 
 
Module 1 