Section 4 – The Principles of Marksmanship 
Shot release & follow through (continued) 
Breathing Control 
As you will imagine, breathing in and out while trying to maintain a sight picture is an almost impossible task to perform 
as your sights move up and down in rhythm to your breathing. To compensate, you are going to have to pause your 
breath cycle to fire the shot. 
Where you pause is personal preference as some like to fire on a complete exhale, some pause either a third or half way 
on an exhale and others like to hold a full lung. 
Let’s look at some of the benefits and downfalls of each: 
 
Benefits 
Pitfalls 
Empty 
Shooting on empty lungs has the main 
benefit of consistency as your body will 
have a greater contact patch to the floor 
when shooting prone 
We all need oxygen so you will suffer from 
oxygen deficit which will lead to an 
unsteady hold if you dwell on the trigger 
too long before firing 
You should fire within 15 seconds 
dependent on your individual physique 
before your vision is impaired. 
Full 
Your dwell time on aim can be increased by 
maintaining a lungful of air 
Your contact patch with the floor is greatly 
reduced. 
It is possible to take too long in the aim as 
a result and subsequently ruin the shot  
Midway 
Gradual reduction in lung capacity can aid 
in the establishment of a good sight 
picture. Many will slowly exhale till the 
reach an ideal position then go and 
complete the trigger pull 
Reduced lung capacity reduces your ability 
to hold a sight picture. 
It is extremely hard to consistently match 
your lung capacity for each subsequent 
shot 
The natural respiratory pause lasts usually just seconds during the normal breathing cycle and it is vitally important to 
only hold as long as you feel comfortable. There is no point holding your breath till your eyes bulge, your diaphragm 
spasms and your heart rate sores as that will firstly ruin your shot and more than likely cause you to pass out… not good! 
We like to see the shot fired within 15 to 20 seconds of the bolt being locked closed with the firearm ready to fire. Any 
more and it is perfectly acceptable to refill your lungs and operate the bolt handle up to disengage the lugs, preventing 
the firearm discharging. Closing your eyes for a few seconds to “reset” is perfectly acceptable. 
Here is a step by step example of an example shooter taking a shot: 
 
Breathes normally and gathers the target in the sights 
 
Slows breathing down and observes sights settle onto the target 
 
Commence applying trigger pressure 
 
Respiratory “pause” when the shot is fired 
 
Complete Shot release and follow through 
 
 
42
 
 
 
Module 1 