Section 2 –  
Red Dot Sights 
Red Dot Systems 
What is a Red Dot sight? Simply put, it is a light emitting diode projected onto a collimating mirror that creates a 
virtual “dot” that stays in alignment with the firearm it is mounted on, irrespective (to a certain degree) of the position 
of the shooter’s eye. As you will recall from earlier in this Module, parallax is one of the main components of shooter 
error when using optical based sighting systems and Red Dot systems are no different. This is why you will see a 
myriad of cheap red dot systems on the market. Our best advice is to avoid them as parallax will be a big concern. The 
easiest way to assess a Red Dot system is to hold it up to your eye and move your head from side to side a small 
amount, if the dot moves around the target, the system is not parallax free and should best be handed back. 
Red dot sights are considered what is known as “fast target acquisition” systems. They do take a certain amount of 
getting used to as the shooter’s head has to be in a very specific location in order to actually see the dot. This skill can 
only be learnt by repeated use and muscle memory. 
Red Dot sights generally come in two different configurations, the older closed tube design which resembles a 
telescopic sight and the newer reflex setup. 
 
Tube Style 
Reflex 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The mechanics of both systems are very similar in that a light emitting diode is projected onto a curved piece of glass 
that aligns with the shooter’s eye. It is important to note that effective use of red dot systems requires the shooter 
keep both eyes open. 
These sights are designed for general purpose use with pistols, shotguns and some rifles. They have a larger dot which 
is dependent on the manufacturer, model and cost. The projected dot is usually measured in MoA or MilRads, ranging 
from 2 MoA (0.6 mrad) and 5 MoA (1.6 mrad). 
 
Sights designed for longer range shooting will have a smaller dot, measuring 
between 2 to 3 MoA (0.6 to 0.8 mrad). 
In its purest format, the red dot reticle is exactly as you would expect: 
This is the sight picture you will see through a standard Red Dot sighting system. 
 
 
 
82
 
 
 
 
Module 2 