Section 3 – Firearm Mechanics (continued) 
Let’s look at No. 4a, the bolt face using the following picture and identify any issues: 
1. Firing Pin – it’s not sticking out  
2. Extractor – Yes, present 
3. Ejector – Oh, looks like a spring is missing (it 
should be protruding out of the bolt face) 
 
4. Lugs – Yes, all there. 
 
This machined out area of the bolt nose is called the bolt face recess 
 
Before looking at a bolt with problems, let’s first just explain what the Firing Pin, Extractor & ejector do. 
 
1. Firing Pin 
Is a hardened pin that is propelled forward on firing which strikes the primer in the cartridge, 
setting it off. The distance the pin travels is very small so the spring needs to be incredibly 
strong. A light spring will always cause misfires and will need to be replaced by a gunsmith. 
2. Extractor 
The extractor is a small piece of hardened metal with a claw on the end. It is sprung (within the 
body of the bolt) and when pressed outwards, should offer lots of resistance. The extractor 
claw engages the rear of the cartridge so that when you operate the bolt to the rear, it will 
hook on and pull the cartridge out of the chamber 
3. Ejector 
The ejector works in conjunction with the extractor and is usually positioned directly opposite. 
It pushes on the back of the cartridge and also contains a spring behind it. When the extractor 
and ejector are working together, this pulling and pushing force makes sure the cartridge does 
not get stuck but is ejected firmly. This is known as “positive ejection”. If the ejector spring has 
broken (in the case of the photo above) the case will in all likelihood just spin around inside 
the action. It will not stop your shooting but just prove itself a nuisance. 
The ejector should be standing proud of the inside recess of the bolt face 
4. Bolt face 
recess 
This is where the base of the cartridge case is supported by the bolt as opposed to the chamber. 
The recess is machined to the tolerances laid down by the specification of the calibre and bolts 
are essentially not transferable between firearms 
 
 
 
26
 
 
 
Module 1 