Section 2 – Muzzle Awareness 
Simply put, muzzle awareness is core to good firearms handling. Poor muzzle awareness will always generate 
negative comments from other range users and if the situation appears to look threatening even by accident, it will 
almost certainly result in removal from the range and subsequent disciplinary action taken against the offender. 
 
What is muzzle awareness? 
Muzzle awareness is always being aware of, and paying attention to, where the barrel is pointing when the firearm is 
either being handled or when it has been set aside. The end of the barrel (muzzle) should always be pointing in a SAFE 
direction, ALWAYS. 
If a firearm is pointed at you, your natural reaction would be one of self-preservation and you will move out of the line 
the firearm is pointing. Nobody likes to be staring down the barrel of a firearm! 
 
Good Handling Skills 
From the very start of the course, you will be instructed about muzzle awareness. If there is a malfunction with a 
firearm, for instance, we can become fixated with the area in question and take our eye off the overriding control 
factor which is where the firearm is pointing. 
The 4 Safety Rules ALL relate to muzzle awareness, please refresh the rules in your mind again before moving on 
through the manual as we will refer to them throughout the course. 
Imagine there is a taught, strong wire running down the barrel of the firearm you are handling and it is attached to the 
target you are firing at. It would be almost impossible to move the barrel direction away from the target. This would 
equate to superb muzzle awareness as the muzzle cannot point anywhere else but the target. 
Unfortunately for all of us, we will be muzzle swept at some time in our shooting career. This is when somebody 
inadvertently points a firearm at us. Whatever the reason is, it equates to bad handling skills on the part of the person 
handling the firearm, and depending on the severity of the event, it will tell you a great deal about the person’s level of 
expertise with firearms. This behaviour will almost certainly result in action being taken against the offender too, 
including dismissal from the NRA, its ranges and potentially notification and subsequent Police involvement. 
The term “muzzle swept” basically means a person has accidentally or deliberately pointed a firearm at another person 
in the process of moving it from one position to another. If you are muzzle swept, a tactful word with the offender is 
usually all it needs to prevent further action, but if it happens again, please report it to the Range Office if at Bisley or if 
you are at another club, a word with whoever is running the range should suffice. What you don’t want though is a 
return comment along the lines of “Oh, it’s only old Joe, it probably isn’t loaded…”. A comment like that suggests the 
range is being thoroughly mismanaged and is in all likelihood a very unsafe place to be in. 
Good handling skills are a bit like learning a new physical activity. You first have to walk your way through the whole 
process several times before muscle memory takes over and those handling skills become second nature. 
When learning new handling skillsets, it’s generally easier to break it down into bite sized portions. 
For instance, when you are taken to the range, you will be asked by your Instructor to step up to the bench where the 
firearms are laid out. You will notice that the muzzles are all pointing towards the target – there’s your introduction to 
muzzle awareness! 
 
 
 
16
 
 
 
Module 1 