Section 4 – The Principles of Marksmanship 
Position & Hold (continued) 
There are 4 points of contact between the shooter in the unsupported position and the firearm. They are: 
 
1. Shoulder 
3. Driving Hand 
2. Cheek 
4. Firing Hand 
 
 
1. Shoulder As an exercise, put your shooting arm out to the side at 90 degrees from your body and with your 
other hand in the shape of a blade, place it on your shoulder at the junction of your arm and move 
your shooting arm around in a small circle. You will feel a distinctive line between two muscle groups 
and it is here that you want to be placing the buttstock, below your collarbone! This contact point 
should be good and solid but not so hard that it fatigues you. It is known in the shooting world as a 
solid weld 
2. Cheek 
The next point of contact is your cheek which applies outward pressure from the inside of the 
buttstock, this pressure is compensated by contact point no 4, the firing hand 
3. Driving 
hand 
Your non-firing hand is employed in positively directing the firearm towards the target. The position 
of your hand in relation to the stock is purely personal preference but it has to be comfortable. Too 
far back and you can interfere with the cocking handle on semi auto rifles and too far forward will 
ultimately fatigue you 
4. Firing 
hand 
Your firing hand (the one that pulls the trigger) is now wrapped around the neck of the stock and 
should be applying just enough pressure towards you to compensate for your cheek pressure (# 2) 
 
The position and hold you employ has to be consistent. 
Adopting the correct, consistent position and hold is key to accurate shooting, irrespective of the shooting position you 
are in: 
 
 
Standing 
 
Sitting 
 
Kneeling 
 
Prone 
You will very quickly learn muscle memory and automatically adopt the same hold as second nature but if you start to 
notice your group mean point of impact has shifted, this is an instant tell-tale for inconsistent position & hold of the 
firearm. 
 
 
 
35
 
 
 
Module 1 