Section 1 –  
Bisley General Info
About the Course (continued) 
There are incidences when drink or drug use has been suspected in the past and the root cause has turned out to be a 
lack of taking the appropriate medication on the part of the person under suspicion. 
An example would be a person with Type 1 Diabetes who has not had an Insulin shot and who subsequently exhibits all 
the hallmarks of being under the influence of something. 
This example by no means affects all those with diabetes as there are many Insulin dependent people who do not 
exhibit these symptoms at all. 
Hay fever sufferers require taking antihistamines to help alleviate their symptoms and sometimes it can make the 
sufferer appear drowsy. 
Auto Brewery Syndrome is a classic issue as the sufferer smells of alcohol but has not been anywhere near drink of any 
kind. 
Sometimes, a carefully chosen observation might be all that’s needed as a form of reminder. 
In terms of distances you will shoot from throughout the course, here’s a breakdown of what you will be doing: 
Day 
Firearms used 
Range (yards) 
1 
Ruger 10/22 .22 LR iron sighted rifle  
Marlin .357 Mag lever action rifle 
Ruger American .22 LR scoped bolt action rifle 
25 
25 
25 & 50 
2 
Ruger American .22 LR scoped bolt action rifle 
Savage .308 scoped bolt action rifle 
100 
3 
AR15 5.56mm Straight-Pull rifle  
Enfield .303 bolt action rifle 
Savage .308 Vernier sight bolt action rifle 
300 (AM) 
Savage .308 scoped bolt action rifle 
600 (PM) 
4 
Savage .308 scoped bolt action rifle 
1000 (AM) 
 
As you can see, on Day 4 AM you will be shooting at 1000 yards. Many people will look at this distance and feel it is just 
a little too far for novice shooters. This statement couldn’t be further from the truth, as by Day 4 the abilities you will 
have learnt will ensure you are capable of successfully hitting the target with every shot. There is also an exceptionally 
high chance you will hit the centre of the target too. When you look at the 1000 yard target centre, it is only 14.4” 
across so when you hit it (what we call a “V-Bull”), congratulate yourself! 
Being the culmination of your training at this distance, you will be able to assess the elevation you need to alter the 
sights. You will also be able to read and assess the wind and apply changes to the sights before settling the crosshairs 
on the target, firing, and 2 ½ seconds later, after travelling about 36 feet above the target at the highest point of its 
trajectory, record a hit on your target. 
 
 
5
 
 
 
Module 1 