Section 2 –  
How to adjust sights –  
Scope 
Putting it all together (continued) 
Let’s just have another look at the elevation turret so you can familiarise yourself with it again. 
 
 
 
1st – The “U” and an arrow pointing in a direction is all you need to figure this one out. You will be surprised to hear 
that it is not uncommon for shooters to accidentally go the wrong way. Please be also aware that not all 
manufacturers adhere to UP = Anticlockwise. Some are the other way round so always assess. 
2nd The example scope turret above is divided into ¼ increments. These increments are sometimes referred to as 
“clicks”. 
3rd and lastly, check how many whole units there are in a full 360 degree turn of the turret. As you can see from the 
photo, we have “0” round to “24” in an anticlockwise direction but don’t forget the increments from “24” to the “0” 
point. That’s another unit so this example scope has 25 whole units for that full rotation. 
Our brains mostly don’t like dealing with large numbers so let’s look at the value we need to apply to the scope in 
order to hit the target at 1000 yards which in this example is 36 ½. 
This scope is what is known as a “¼ click”, i.e. 4 clicks per whole unit. Simple maths dictates that in order to get 36 ½ 
units applied, we’d need to apply 36 ½ x 4 or 146 clicks to set up the scope. 146 clicks will take you forever to apply and 
there is an absolute certainty that you’ll get interrupted by something as you count – 105, 106, 107, 10… “Do you fancy 
a cup of coffee” and guess what, you’ve forgotten where you are. 
Try not to think in individual clicks but apply the change based on whole units and whole rotations.  
In the example we know: 
 
There are 4 clicks per unit (MoA) 
 
There are 25 units per full rotation of the turret 
So, to apply 36 ½ units or MoA, we’d apply 1 full rotation = 25 units plus 11 individual whole units plus 2 clicks = 36 ½ 
Simple, and it didn’t take you hours of fiddling about with the turret. 
Less time fiddling = more time shooting. 
 
 
1st – Always ascertain which direction is UP. 
In this case, it’s clearly Anti-Clockwise 
2nd – Figure out how many sub- 
tensions there are per complete unit. 
In this case the are 4 or ¼ increments 
3rd – Look at the turret and work out 
how many units there are per 
complete rotation of the turret 
76
 
 
 
 
Module 2 