Section 1 –  
Sight Systems - Boresighting 
What is Boresighting? 
Simply put, boresighting means looking down the bore of a firearm at a recognised target then bringing your eye up to 
the sighting system WITHOUT touching the firearm, then manipulating the sighting system adjustment until it’s 
pointing in the same place as the bore. 
When do I need to boresight? 
You should boresight a firearm whenever you change the sighting components, are setting up a firearm/sighting 
system combination for the first time or have removed or moved your sighting system around. 
Why do I need Boresight? 
Accurate boresighting is a very effective method of ensuring that a subsequent cold bore, close range shot (say up to 
100 yards) is 99% guaranteed to hit the target face, therefore safely hit the butts behind. 
That all means SAFETY, SAFETY and SAFETY. 
It also means you’re not spending loads of money needlessly on throwing ammunition down range without a clue as to 
where it’s going. 
Simple? Yes and no. 
Can’t I buy a gadget to Boresight? 
Simple answer, absolutely. 
But you are in possession of a very accurate piece of equipment already… the old Mk 1 eyeball. 
You can go out and buy a boresighting tool. They come in all shapes, costs and sizes. Some are a lot better than others. 
Most involve inserting a rod of some sort into the muzzle or attaching something to the end of the muzzle. All good 
until that fateful day when you forget to remove the item and go ahead and fire. 
Nett result is an expensive error that could end up destroying your firearm and costing ££££ Like anything, there are 
pros and cons with gadgets. 
Pros 
Cons 
 
Quick and easy method to boresight anywhere 
 
Gadget can be kept in your kit bag 
 
Lasers can be seen at closer ranges and you could attract 
unwanted attention 
 
Accuracy issue with the gadget concentricity to the bore 
 
Forgetting to take it out & firing… oops. 
 
Battery goes flat at the WRONG time 
 
Laser only good at very short range and pretty much 
hopeless on a sunny day. You will NOT see the laser dot 
on a target at 100 yards… 
 
 
 
48
 
 
 
Module 2 