Section 2 –  
How to adjust sights–Iron 
Iron Sighted Systems General 
The system usually relies on two components, the foresight and the rear sight. In order to be effective, the sights are 
arranged down the centre axis of the bore from the back to the front of the firearm. Iron sights can be either fixed, 
meaning they have no adjustability or some form of adjustability for elevation and/or windage. 
The distance between the sights is known as the Sight Radius so the longer the distance, the angular error and resulting 
inaccuracy is lessened. 
You will encounter many different styles of open sight, from a very basic V notch affair right up to a Vernier sight with 
very fine adjustability. 
Here are some examples: 
 
Basic pistol square notch 
“patridge” sight, no 
adjustment 
Buckhorn style rear sight 
setup with orange coloured 
front bead 
MBus style front & rear 
“ghost ring” sights. Both 
are adjustable 
Vernier Rear Sight. Fine 
adjustability for 
elevation 
& windage 
 
 
 
 
Iron sights (with the exception of shotguns, which only have a front “bead” sight) come in pairs, front & rear. The idea 
being you match them up to the target (see section on Sighting Systems). 
Some front sights are adjustable too, mainly for elevation. The idea being that if you need to apply a lot of elevation to 
a firearm to shoot at extreme distances (1000 yards & beyond), applying that elevation to the rear sight will almost 
certainly upset your Position & Hold (see section on Principles of Marksmanship) on the stock. By applying large 
changes to the front, you can fine tune the rear and your position on the stock will not be upset. 
 
Because there can be two forms of adjustment, it is extremely easy to apply change in the wrong direction. Always 
remember the rear sight is adjusted in the SAME direction as you want to go. The front sight is always adjusted in the 
opposite direction. All will be made clear by referencing the section on Sighting Systems. 
 
 
60
 
 
 
 
Module 2 