Section 3 – Firearm Mechanics 
Rifling 
In order to successfully, consistently and accurately hit a target at longer ranges a firearm needs rifling, a smooth bore 
firearm like a shotgun does not have rifling as it would upset the guns ability to throw a shot pattern. 
You need a barrel that has been machined with helical or spiral grooves running down the centre of the barrel from 
one end to the other. This is what is referred to as rifling. 
 
Lands 
 
These are the projecting parts of 
the barrel that engrave the bullet 
surface as it travels down the 
barrel, gaining speed as it does 
so. 
The lands have to grip the bullet 
to impart the required spin rate 
so need to have relatively sharp 
edges 
 
Grooves 
 
As the name would suggest, 
grooves are machine cut into the 
barrel at equal distances within 
the barrel to ensure the lands 
have an adequate grip on the 
bullet in its travel down the bore 
 
These spirals impart torque and spin on the bullet as it travels down the barrel. The amount of spin imparted is 
dictated by the tightness of those spirals in terms of complete revolutions per foot of barrel. This is known as the twist 
rate.  
We will not get into the science of rifling here as it is a huge topic in its own right. Our advice would be to have a chat 
with an Instructor at an appropriate time during the course for more information. 
A general rule of thumb with twist rate is the faster the twist, the heavier the bullet can be. An example would be a 
5.56x45 AR15 with a twist rate of 1 in 7 that can effectively and accurately shoot a heavy for calibre bullet like an 85 
grain bullet whereas a slower twist barrel in the same firearm, say 1 in 14, will only stabilise up to 50 or so grains in 
weight. 
One thing to remember down the line when you are looking at purchasing a firearm is to thoroughly assess what you 
want to achieve prior to purchase, and one consideration is the available twist rates for the calibre you are looking at. 
Like all things mechanical, rifling does wear with each successive round being fired down the barrel and eventually the 
barrel will need to be replaced once the innate accuracy of the rifle has deteriorated beyond what is required of it. It is 
very difficult to answer the question of how many rounds it will take to render a barrel inaccurate though, as not all 
calibres degrade a barrel the same way. 
Some calibres are well known as “barrel burners” because of their muzzle velocity. Generally speaking, the higher the 
velocity, the faster the wear will occur. 
The grooves that are cut in the barrel need to have a relatively sharp profile in order to firmly control and hold the 
bullet as it starts it’s acceleration down the barrel. The acceleration goes from 0 to about 2800 feet per second with 
the 308 Winchester (which you will fire on Day 2) in approximately the first 18 inches of barrel, that’s approximately 
1900 MPH! 
A .22 LR standard velocity bullet will reach approximately 1100 FPS which is still an impressive 750 MPH 
 
 
 
21
 
 
 
Module 1 