Section 1 –  
Bisley General Info
About the Course (continued) 
A word of caution though, if an Instructor doesn’t feel you are ready to progress, they will first talk to you about 
repeating the particular day with the Lead Instructor/Chief Instructor or National Training Manager present for advice. 
Remember, it’s not a “naughty step” it’s so we are confident you can move forward comfortably and you don’t get into 
the embarrassing situation of feeling lost in the next piece of training as it will have a cumulative effect. 
Upon completion of the test and assessments on Day 4, you will be issued a restricted Shooters Certification Card 
(SCC) which will allow you to attend Bisley and hire firearms/purchase ammo to shoot but you must be accompanied 
by another person who holds a full SCC with the type of shooting you wish to do on their SCC. 
Shooting Club Days are designed to prepare you for the next step which is “leaving the nest” so to speak and acquitting 
yourself safely on the ranges. You will be to all intents and purposes on your own but there will be a member of the 
Training Team on hand should you have any issues. You need to attend two separate Shooting Club days to get the 
signatures in your manual so don’t forget to bring it on both occasions. You will need to independently hire a firearm 
from the NRA main Armoury but this process is detailed within this manual. You can also purchase ammunition from 
the Armoury at standard costs which are regularly maintained on the NRA website. 
Upon successful completion of each Module and 2 visits with the Shooting Club, this book will be endorsed by the 
Instructor team so remember to bring it! 
Each morning, you will be asked by the Lead Instructor for a verbal declaration. It covers: 
 
Any Ammunition? 
 
Anybody suffering from the effects of drink or drugs? 
 
We require that you confirm with the Lead Instructor a negative in each case. 
Why? 
Ammunition 
There will be firearms in the classroom throughout the course and you will be instructed in their use, including 
handling skills, loading, unloading and making ready. You will be divided into small groups of up to 4 with an assigned 
Instructor. The firearms will all have been checked and examined by the Instructor first, which they will then ask you to 
verify. 
Don’t worry if you don’t know what to look for as the Instructor will detail this inspection process for you during the 
demonstration. 
There will NEVER be any ammunition in the training rooms though for one simple reason. It’s DANGEROUS! 
Drink/Drugs 
You will agree that alcohol and firearms are literally a dangerous mix and we, as well as all other shooters, have a zero 
tolerance policy to it. In the future you might encounter someone who you suspect may be under the influence of 
either drink or drugs and you are duty bound to contact the Range Office as soon as you can so the duty staff member 
may then take action. 
Illegal drugs have a similar effect too, and you should treat them in the same way. 
But… 
 
 
4
 
 
 
Module 1 