Section 3 – Firearms (continued) 
Normal Safety Procedures or NSP’s 
During the initial walk through, the Instructor will point out all the working parts and their methods of operation. They 
will explain how the mechanism operates and how to load and unload. They will also describe the NSP process which is 
also known as a “show clear”. The walk through will concentrate on the Ruger 10/22 .22LR semi-auto and the Marlin 
.357 Magnum Lever Action 
Your 1st Range Visit 
This first range visit is purely to get used to firing real firearms (if you’ve not done so before) and you will not be asked 
to go through the NSP’s yet. That will come later. This session is not about who can drill the smallest group into a 
target but getting used to firearms and feeling comfortable. 
Depending on conditions, you will be using the .22 LR from the Ruger and the .357 Marlin (see the next section on 
Ammunition). 
At this stage, your Instructor will not be critical of how you shoot but obviously will stop you if there is a potentially 
dangerous situation brewing. 
At this juncture, we will introduce a couple of what are known as range commands for you. There is a full section on 
Ranges as part of Day 3 though. 
STOP! STOP! STOP! 
A shouted command that means… STOP! If you hear it – FREEZE. The only thing the 
Instructor wants to see moving is your finger coming off the trigger – DO NOTHING ELSE! 
EYES & EARS OR 
ADJUST YOUR MUFFS 
AND GLASSES 
Always ensure that prior to walking onto any range, you put your hearing protection on. 
On some ranges we also insist you wear protective eyewear. These items are issued to you 
as part of your Day 1 pack 
* MISFIRE 
A misfire is exactly as you would think, you pull the trigger and the firearm goes “click” 
instead of “BANG!” 
Misfires can occur with rimfire ammunition and the Instructor will tell you prior to your 
first range visit to just keep the firearm pointed downrange and they will sort out the issue 
for you 
LOAD 
Means insert a loaded magazine into the magazine well 
MAKE READY 
Point the firearm at the target and rack the action. The Instructor will do this for you at this 
stage but you will do it in the PM range session 
FIRE 
GO ON etc. 
Fire, couldn’t really mean anything else! 
UNLOAD 
Means do this in the following order: 
1. Keep the firearm pointing at the target at all times! 
2. Remove the magazine 
3. Lock the bolt back 
4. Do your NSP’s (previous section) 
5. Show the firearm to the Instructor (remembering your muzzle awareness!) 
BENCH FIREARM 
Exactly that, just lay the firearm down on the table with the muzzle pointing towards your 
target with the action open and facing upwards. 
* A quick note on Misfires 
Modern ammunition tends not to suffer misfires as much as it did when quality control wasn’t as stringent 50 years 
ago but they still do happen and rimfire ammunition is susceptible because of the method employed during 
manufacture.  
For a full description on the NRA Misfire Procedure, please refer to the relevant section in Day 2. 
 
 
19
 
 
 
Module 1 