Section 2 –  
Scope sights– Parts 
– Naming the parts (continued) 
Ocular Lens & Focus ring 
The Ocular lens is the lens you look through. It transmits the reticle information to you and it is the first thing you 
should adjust for focus before you do anything else. If the ocular is out of focus, the information will not be in focus. It 
doesn’t matter if the target looks clear because you will have introduced parallax errors before you even start 
shooting. Remember, it’s all about accuracy 
Magnification Adjustment ring 
This control is usually somewhere near the Ocular but it all depends on individual manufacturers. The ring will always 
be labelled from a small number to a large one (min to max mag). As mentioned previously, if the magnification starts 
at 1 x power, this is the equivalent of the same power as the human eye and each successive increase is just that. For 
instance, 10 x power is 10 x the power of the eye and so on. 
Magnification is a great thing, you have a clearer image of the target which is the most obvious bonus for accurate 
shot placement. For every positive, there’s always a negative though. With extremely high mag, you will encounter 
black out. This is when the image is totally obscured, you literally cannot see a thing and would suspect the lens cap is 
still on. 
This is caused by a drastic reduction in exit pupil. 
 
Exit Pupil - A human in their mid to late teens with 20/20 vision has an exit pupil of about 7mm. This is the 
width of the beam of light leaving the eyepiece that the eye can then process. Any more and it is simply 
ignored. This gets gradually smaller the older we get. 
The higher the magnification, the smaller the transmitted information or exit pupil becomes. If you take a 
scope with an objective lens (see below) of 56mm and you divide this number by 7 (ideal exit pupil), you get 
the optimal magnification of: 
56 / 7 = 8 
So 8 x magnification would be the best setup but we want to see more of the target. 
Increase the magnification to 20 x power and reverse engineer the formula: 
56 / 20 = 2.8 
That’s 2.8mm of available light being transmitted back to your eye which means your position & hold MUST be 
absolutely in the centre line of the scope or you will not see anything. If you take that centre line, the 2.8mm of 
available light is halved which means you’ve only got 1.4mm of wiggle room to correctly position your eye. 
 
Heart rate – The higher the magnification, the more pronounced your heart rate is transmitted through the 
firearm meaning you will see reticle “bounce” which will be in time with your heart. The only way to negate 
this is to wind down the magnification to a setting where your heart rate is not observed. 
 
 
2.8mm in total, 1.4mm 
either side of the centre line 
72
 
 
 
 
Module 2 