NATIONAL RIFLE ASSOCIATION
TRAINING MANUAL
Updated May 2021
Edition Nine
Updated and reprinted December 2024
Edition Three
Probationary
Training
Manual
Probationary
Training
Manual
2021 
Updated and reprinted December 2024
Edition Three
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© National Rifle Association 2024 
 
 
 
 
Edition Three 
 
 
 
December 2024 
 
 
 
National Rifle Association Bisley 
Brookwood Surrey GU24 0PB 
 
Tel: 01483 797777 Fax: 01483 797285 
Email: NRA.Training@nra.org.uk 
or 
info@nra.org.uk 
www.nra.org.uk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revisions to Issue One 
 
Date 
Changes 
March 2024 
Minor spelling corrections, minor changes to text, graphics updates. 
March 2024 
Addition to Mod 3 Wind explanation 
April 2024 
Amendments to FAC application process 
May 2024 
Addition to PoM’s -  Breathing Control 
May 2024 
Addition of new Sections: Cannons, LPB & LBR. 
May 2024 
Range Officer Role added 
June 2024 
Addition of Recording and Reporting attendance 
July 2024 
Addition of the JustGo system reference material 
July 2024 
Removal of old training material references 
July 2024 
Edited new sign off process 
August 2024 
New SCC review 
August 2024 
How to use the JustGo system for booking firearms use 
August 2024 
NRA Shooting Club section added 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page left blank intentionally 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Welcome 
Welcome to Bisley. We hope that this is the start of many years of safe, successful, and happy shooting. 
 
By joining the National Rifle Association you are becoming part of one of the world’s oldest shooting organisations. 
Not only is the NRA the national governing body of target shooting sports in the UK, it is also the country’s largest Home 
Office Approved Club. 
 
One of the many privileges of full membership is that you will be able to shoot on our ranges without supervision. 
Depending on the type of shooting that you decide to do, you will be able to shoot at distances as short as 10 yards, or 
as great as 1200 yards. However, with privilege comes huge responsibility. Before we can grant membership, we must 
be absolutely certain that you are able to handle and use firearms to a high standard of safety. We will train you to the 
best of our ability although, ultimately, the responsibility is yours. 
The number of incidents and accidents involving legally held firearms in the United Kingdom is incredibly low. Safety, 
however, is not something that can be taken for granted. It has to be worked at constantly. All shooters, even the most 
experienced, can fall victim to complacency unless they constantly monitor their behaviour and always follow the 
safety rules. 
 
Introduction to the NRA Probationary Course 
To comply with current Home Office guidelines, probationary members must complete a course in the safe handling 
of firearms and shoot regularly under supervision before they can become full members of a Home Office Approved 
Club. The minimum time period for probationary membership at the NRA is three months. 
The NRA probationary course not only involves training in the safe use and handling of various different types of 
firearm, but also in the legal aspects of firearms use and ownership. The course stresses the absolute necessity of 
maintaining a responsible attitude towards all aspects of firearms use, and does not shy away from describing what 
can happen if safe practices are not observed. 
 
Students will be continuously assessed throughout the course and on the afternoon of day 4, will be required to pass 
a written exam (multiple choice) and an assessment in the handling and use of firearms. However, students will not 
be asked to undertake an assessment test until we are satisfied that they have gained sufficient confidence and skill. 
A probationer who fails an assessment must receive additional training before being re-tested. 
NRA probationary training is not specific to any particular shooting discipline. 
Once full membership has been gained, further training is available to enable the new shooter to enter the world of 
competition shooting in whatever disciplines appeal to them (for more information, please see the Reference Section). 
 
About this Manual 
This book does not pretend to be a stand-alone manual of all things to do with target shooting. It is an integral part of 
the NRA Probationary Course, and should be studied together with the NRA Handbook (the ‘Bisley Bible’) which will be 
issued at the start of Module 1. Most of the questions in the multiple-choice examination are derived from these two 
publications. It also functions as your personal record of training. Make sure that you remember to ask your instructor 
to sign off each section as you progress through the course. 
Lastly… 
If you see a RED dashed line down the side of a section (left), 
this indicates part of the Modular syllabus and you have to  
read it first! 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Page No 
Welcome 
 
Previous 
Record of Probationary Training Sheet 
Next 
Module 1 
1 