Section 2 – The 4 Safety Rules 
Accompanying the NRA Safe Shooting System, we have 4 Safety Rules which, if you follow them, will endeavour to 
make your shooting now and in the future as safe as possible. Commit them to memory! They are: 
 
 
1 ALWAYS PROVE A FIREARM 
IS UNLOADED WHENEVER 
YOU PICK IT UP, OR HAND IT 
TO ANYONE, OR TAKE IT 
FROM ANYONE 
It is essential that the condition of a firearm (whether or 
not it is loaded) is known before being handled. 
Always assume that a firearm is loaded until 
proved otherwise. 
Unless the firearm is being fired on a range, it must never 
be loaded and must be seen to be unloaded and safe. 
2 ALWAYS POINT THE 
FIREARM AT YOUR TARGET 
Directional control of a firearm is absolutely essential, 
and the only direction acceptable is toward your target 
from the firing point designated. The design and 
construction of most outdoor ranges is such that the 
ability of the range to contain bullets is determined by 
the fact that they must be fired in a specific direction 
from any particular firing point. If they are fired at an 
angle of elevation or azimuth which exceeds these limits 
the bullet may well travel beyond the range boundary. 
3 NEVER PLACE YOUR FINGER 
ON THE TRIGGER UNTIL YOU 
ARE READY TO SHOOT 
This rule doesn't mean that the gun has to be carefully 
aimed at the target before the finger can be placed on the 
trigger, rather that the finger can be placed on the trigger 
when the firearm is in the shooting position pointing 
towards the target but before being carefully aimed. 
4 NEVER POINT A FIREARM AT 
ANYONE 
This means NEVER point a firearm at anybody as a result 
of horseplay, joking, lack of discipline or lack of thought. 
There are, of course, some perfectly legitimate 
exceptions, such as these: 
 
An instructor checking a student's eye alignment with 
the sights, under strictly controlled conditions 
 
Visually checking the bore from the muzzle end for 
obstructions or condition, on firearms such as the 
Ruger 10/22, where it is not possible to look through 
the barrel from the receiver end 
 
Using a pull-through to clean the barrel – the gun is 
pointing straight at your hand or head. 
 
They are known as “The 4 Safety Rules” and on Mod 1, your Instructors will go through them in more detail but as 
you can see, they’re fairly self-evident. 
One look at some of the horrors that abound on social media sites is clear evidence of shocking handling errors that 
would have been avoided if those persons had just abided by these 4 Safety Rules. 
Abiding by the NRA Safe Shooting System and these 4 Safety rules should ensure your shooting career will be a long, 
safe and happy one. 
 
 
15
 
 
 
Module 1 