Section 2 –  
Scope sights– General 
Scope Sighted Systems General 
Scopes do not share the same setup as Iron Sighted systems as it’s all internal within the mechanism. We will not be 
covering the internal workings of scopes in this manual as they’re far too complicated. 
A telescopic sight or scope for short is an optical sighting device based on the overall principles of how a telescope 
works but with the addition of a reference point within. This is called the reticle (see below). 
Scopes are mounted to a firearm along its centre line to achieve accuracy. For more information on mounting scopes, 
please see the “How to fit a Scope Sight” section in the reference area of this manual. 
Scopes can have a myriad of options available, here is a list of some of the more common elements: 
 
Element 
Description 
Fixed Magnification 
Scope does not have any other magnification available other than what’s been set at the 
factory 
Variable 
Magnification 
Mag power starts at 1x which is basically the power of your eye and can go up as far as 
50x or even more. 
Reticle 
These are the reference points mentioned earlier. They can be a simple crosshair right 
up to some of the most complicated Ballistic Drop Reticles known to the human kind 
Angular 
Measurement 
Scope adjustment is generally divided into two types, MoA or Mils. They can also have 
all sorts of subtensions. In the case of an MoA scope, ¼ or ½ click to name a couple 
Objective Size 
The objective is the front lens on a scope and is measured in mm. Generally speaking, 
the bigger the objective, the more light is received but there are many other factors like 
glass quality, so you could have the biggest objective on the planet but the image looks 
like you are looking through a milk bottle. Another consideration is the larger the 
objective, the higher the mounts need to be to clear the barrel. 
Focal Plane 
1st Focal plane means that as you increase mag, the reticle increases in size too. 
2nd Focal plane means that the reticle stays the same, irrespective of magnification 
selected. For a detailed description, please see the article in this section 
Eye Relief 
This is the distance between the eyepiece of the scope and the eye where the optimal 
image from the scope can be seen – this topic is covered in greater detail below 
 
To adjust a scope for elevation & windage, you first have to identify the correct controls. To do this effectively, always 
consult the owner’s manual as not all manufacturers adhere to the same naming conventions or positions of the 
control surfaces on their products. 
Generally speaking though, elevation is dialled in by turning a turret usually located on the top of the scope and 
windage is usually off the right side. 
Because the adjustment is all internal, you will not see any discernible shift in the crosshairs. 
 
 
 
68
 
 
 
 
Module 2 